---
title: "Real Analysis III"
author: "Ryan Anderson"
date: '2025-03-31'
layout: single
output: html_document
---

## Lecture 3/31: Measure and Integration on Topological Spaces in General
We construct a chain of concepts in real analysis, beginning with the _Borel $\sigma$-algebra_ $\mathbb{B}$ which is the $\sigma$-algebra on $\mathbb{R}^n$ generated by all open sets.

Following that we have the _Lebesgue measure_, $m: \mathbb{B} \to [0,+\infty]$, which has lovely properties like countable additivity.

That leads naturally to the _Lebesgue integral_ on $\mathbb{R}^n$ which we consider as a function $S: L^1(\mathbb{R}^d) \to \mathbb{C}$, where $L^1(\mathbb{R}^d)$ is the set of Lebesgue measurable functions on $\mathbb{R}^d$.

Note that $L^1(\mathbb{R}^d)$ is a very permissive class of functions. Contained within it is the set $C_c(\mathbb{R}^d)$, which consists of all continuous functions with compact support. You can generate Riemann integrals on these spaces.

Now in general let $X$ be a _locally compact Hausdorff (LCH) space_. Since $X$ is a topological space we can take the Borel $\sigma$-algebra, which is of course generated by the open sets on $X$. Since $X$ is LCH this is equal to the sigma-algebra generated by the closed sets, which is equal to the sigma-algebra generated by the compact sets on $X$. By [Urysohn's lemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urysohn%27s_lemma) this is equivalent to the sigma-algebra generated by the continuous functions on $X$ with compact support -- this is sometimes called the _Baire sigma-algebra._

A _Radon measure_ on $X$ is a non-negative countably additive measure $\mu: \mathbb{B} \to [0, +\infty]$ such that we have
- local finiteness: $\mu(K) < \infty \quad \forall K$ compact
- inner regularity: $\forall \text{ Borel } E, \mu(E) = \sup (\mu(K): K \subset E \text{ compact })$
- outer regularity: $\forall \text{ Borel } E, \mu(E) = \inf (\mu(U): E \subset U \text{ compact })$

Lemma: if $X$ is LCH and $\sigma$-compact, with $\mu$ a Radon measure, then $C_c(X)$ is a dense subset of $L^p(X, \mu) \forall 1 \leq p < \infty$.

As a technical note, we clarify that while $C_c(X)$ is a space of functions (those that are continuous with compact support) while $L^p(X,\mu)$ is a space of functions up to almost-everywhere equivalence. That is, $L^p(X,\mu)$ is a space of equivalence classes of functions, which we elide in the statement of this lemma.

The import of this lemma is that we can approximate any $L^p$ function by a continuous function with compact support. We caveat that $C_c(X)$ is emphatically not dense in $L^{\infty}$.

The above statement corresponds to one of _Littlewood's principles of real analysis_: namely that measurable functions are almost continuous. (The other two principles are that measurable sets are almost open sets, and that pointwise convergence is almost uniform convergence).

Here's another proposition: let $X$ be a compact matric space and $\mu$ a finite nonnegative Borel measure. Then $\mu$ is Radon.

As a demonstration of tactics in this course, let's prove this. First consider $A$ the set of all Borel subsets that satisfy inner and outer regularity for $\mu$. That is, $A = (E \subset \mathbb{B}: \mu(E) = \sup( \mu(U): U \subset E) = \inf( \mu(U): E \subset U))$.

We want to show that $A = \mathbb{B}$. To start we know that $0, X \in A$. We also know that $A$ is closed under complements and under finite unions and intersections. The last note comes from the inclusion-exclusion principle: consider $E_1, E_2 \in \mathbb{B}$ with nonempty intersection. Then $\mu(E_1) + \mu(E_2) = \sup(\mu(U_1) + \mu(U_2)) = \sup(\mu(U_1 \cup U_2) - \mu(U_1 \cap U_2)) = \mu(E_1 \cup E_2) - \mu(E_1 \cap E_2)$.

